So we're going to kick off
our look at sort algorithms by starting with bubble sort.
I want to say right up front that this
algorithm's performance degrades quickly
as the number of items you need to sort grows,
but it's a commonly taught algorithm
and you might hear about it so will take a look at it
and it will get us warmed up for the rest of this section.
So I'm going to start out by explaining
how the algorithm works.
So I have an array on this screen,
it's an array of length seven
so we can store seven integers.
At index 0 we have 20, at index 1 35, at index 2 -15.
You can see the rest of the array there
and we want to use bubble sort to sort this array.
Now the way that bubble sort works
and you're going to see that this is
pretty common with sort algorithms is
as the algorithm progresses,
it partitions the array into a sorted partition
and an unsorted partition
and this is a logical partitioning so
we don't create completely separate array instances
and we an array instance that contains
what we've sorted so far and another
array instance that contains unsorted numbers.
No, everything is done when it comes to bubble sort
using the array that we're sorting
and we partition the array logically
and you're going to see this when
we go through the algorithm in just a minute.
So when we start the algorithm for this array,
we're going to have a field that
we're going to call unsorted partition index
and when we start this will be 6
because the entire array is the
unsorted partition when we start out
because we haven't sorted anything yet.
So 6, it will be the last index of the unsorted partition.
Alright, so the implementation that I'm going to show you
starts at the left of the array, or at index 0,
so that's what I is and what we do
is we compare the elemented index 0
with the elemented index 1
and if the elemented index 0 is greater
than the elemented index 1, we swap the elements.
If it's less we don't do anything
because of course we want to move larger elements
towards the end of the array or towards the right
because we're sorting in ascending order.
So in this case 20 is less than 35
so we don't do any swapping
and then what we're going to do is increment I to 1.
So now we're going to look at
the element at position 1
and compare it with the element at position 2
and in this case 35 is greater than -15,
so we swap them.
So now -15 will be at position 1
and 35 will be at position 2
and we increment I to 2.
So now we're going to compare the
element at index 2 with the elemented index 3.
35 is greater than 7 so we swap them
and we increment I to 3.
So now we're going to compare the elemented index 3
with the elemented index 4.
35 is less than 55 so we don't do anything
we just increment I to 4
and then we compare 55 to 1,
that's the elemented position 4
with the elemented position 5.
55 is greater than 1 so we swap them
and we increment I to 5
and finally we compare 55 to -22
and of course 55 is greater than -22 so we swap them
and at this point I is equal to
the last unsorted partition index so we stop.
We have completed the first traversal of the array
and at the end of that traversal,
the last element in the array is in its correct position
and so at this point the greatest element in the array
will be at index array length minus one
and for our array length minus one is 6.
So at this point what we're going to do is
we're going to set the unsorted partition index to 5
because we now consider position 6 to be sorted
and so the logical partition is going to be between
the elemented index 5 and the elemented index 6.
Everything from index 5 down to the front
of the array is in the unsorted partition
and everything at array index 6 and to the right,
and in this case there isn't anything to the right,
everything there is in the sorted partition.
So on the next traversal,
we can see that 55 is now in the sorted partition
and we set I back to zero
because we want to repeat the process we just did
and the unsorted partition index is now 5.
So we start all over again we go OK
the element at array index 0
is it greater than the element array index 1
and it is and so we swap them
and we increment I to 1
and then we say
is the array element at index 1
greater than the array element at index 2?
Yes it is so we swap them and we increment I to 2.
We say is the element at index 2
greater than the elemented index 3?
No it isn't so we just increment I to 3.
Then we compare the elemented index 3
to the elemented index 4.
35 is greater than one so we swap them,
I get incremented to 4 .
35 is greater than -22 so we swap them.
I gets incremented to 5 and now I equals
the unsorted partition index so we stop.
And at this point, 35 and 55 are in their correct positions
and we set the unsorted partition index to 4.
So now everything in array index 0
to array index 4 is in the unsorted partition
and everything from array index 5
up to the end of the array is in the sorted partition
and we've set I back to zero
because we're now going to repeat the process.
Now I'm not going to go through the other traversals,
they'll operate the exact same way.
We're gonna to keep incrementing I and
we're gonna keep comparing the elemented I
with its neighbour and swap the elements
if its neighbour is less than the elemented I
until the sorted partition is the entire array
and then we're done.
Now this is called a bubble sort because depending on
which way you're sorting, in our case the larger
values in the array will bubble up to the end of the array
and another way of looking at it is to flip
the array vertically so we take the array
and we flip it counterclockwise so that
array element zero is at the bottom and
array element 6 is at the top
and another way of looking at it
is saying that the larger values are
bubbling up to the top of the array.
Now as I said there are some variations
where the array is sorted from right to left
so the traversal goes from right to left
and sometimes the smaller elements are bubbled
to the front of the array
rather than the larger elements
being bubbled to the back of the array
but the same steps are used,
it's the same algorithm.
So that's bubble sort and so now let's take a look at
how this algorithm performs.
First of all, it's an in-place algorithm.
Now what do I mean by that?
Well as I said we're logically partitioning the array.
We don't have to create another array
in order to perform this sort
and so when it comes to memory,
this is an in-place algorithm.
Now we do, as you see when we look at the implementation,
we do create some local variables but that's OK.
It's an in-place algorithm.
If the extra memory that you need
doesn't depend on the number of items you're sorting.
So we're going to create a few local variables, for example,
to store the last sorted partition
and to store I, for example, but
that doesn't mean it's not an in-place algorithm.
If the extra memory you're using
doesn't increase as the number
of items in the array increases,
then it's still an in-place algorithm.
It's OK to use a few extra variables.
Now this algorithm has O to the n square time complexity.
It's a quadratic algorithm
so that means that it will take 100 steps to sort 10 items,
10,000 steps to sort 100 items,
1,000,000 steps to sort 1,000 items.
So as you can see this algorithm really degrades quickly.
Now how do we get O to the n squared?
Well, we'll talk about this a little more
in the next video when we take
a look at the implementation.
So I'll see you there.